Alhamdulillah, O Lord of the worlds
The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful
Owner of the Day of Recompense
It is You we worship, and it is You we ask for help
Guide us to the straight path
The path of those upon whom You have bestowed Your Grace
Those who are not pleased with them, and those who are not pleased with them
Assalamu alaikum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuhu
In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful
All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds
By Him we ask for help, and we pray and salute the best of all creation
Our Prophet Muhammad and his family and companions and those who follow him with kindness
Until the Day of Recompense and after
We praise Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
We send blessings and salutations upon Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
And all his companions
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala bless him
And may he bless them all
And may he bless his entire household
And may he bless all those who have struggled and strived
To protect the Deen, to learn it, to practice upon it
To convey it to others in a way that it has come to us
Wallahi my beloved brothers and sisters
It is a gift of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
To preserve the knowledge of Islam
Because the difference between us and the others
Is we do not accept hearsay
We need that which is sound knowledge
We ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
To make us from amongst those who can sacrifice at least a little bit of time
To learn the Deen
And we ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala to accept it from us
And to grant us every form of goodness
We saw the greatest migration or Hijra in history
In fact it is the only one worth making mention of
And by the arrival of Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
A new chapter commenced
What was the chapter?
Now Revelation had become known as Al-Madani
That which was revealed in Madinah Munawwara
That which was revealed after the Hijra
Up to that stage Revelation was known as Al-Makki
If you look at the Surahs of the Quran
It says Surat so and so Makkiya
Surat so and so Madaniya
Did you know that most of the Surahs were already revealed?
In Makkah al-Mukarrama
Only 23 Surahs were revealed in Madinah Munawwara
Although some of them were long like Surah Baqara
And Al-Imran and so on which were revealed in Madinah Munawwara
They were quite long but the number of Surahs
The bulk of them were already revealed in Makkah al-Mukarrama
And they were discussing the topic of Tawheed
Meaning the oneness of Allah protecting ourselves from associating any form of deity with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Any god with Allah
So that was the core subject that was discussed in the verses that were revealed in Makkah al-Mukarrama
Also as we've explained before
What is known as Imaniyat
Belief in life after death
Belief in heaven and hell
Jannah and Jahannam and so on
We ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala to grant us strength
And to make us from those who are solid believers
And we ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala to make us from those who appreciate the fact
That we are the members of the Ummah of Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
So the Hijra calendar had commenced
Now one might ask a question
Did they start counting from that point?
The answer is no
At the time of Umar ibn Al-Khattab radiallahu anhu later on
After the time of Abu Bakr al-Siddiq radiallahu anhu
When Umar ibn Al-Khattab radiallahu anhu started recording dates
He decided that it should be commenced from the Hijra
And this was the decision made by Umar ibn Al-Khattab radiallahu anhu
Now we learnt yesterday that Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Arrived in Quba on the 12th of Rabi' al-Awwal
And it was a Monday according to some of the narrations
And according to the Christian calendar
It was approximately the 20th of September 622 AD
Approximately the 20th of September 622 AD
So the calendar had started with the first month being Muharram
Why was that?
Why wasn't the first month Rabi' al-Awwal or Rabi' al-Thani?
The answer to that some of the scholars have made mention of a beautiful response
Even Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani has spoken about it
That at that time the treaty or the pledge of Aqabah
The second one was signed in the month of Dhul-Hijjah
And the first Hijra commenced thereafter
The moon they saw after that was the moon of Muharram
So they will start counting from Muharram
So Muharram was when the Hijra had commenced as a whole
Not necessarily just the messenger salallahu alaihi wa sallam
But all his companions at large they had started
And by that time the moon that was sighted was the moon of Muharram
So the calendar started from the first of Muharram
And this is why we have the months in that particular order in our calendar
Which is the Hijra calendar
So this is also a point as we said of great importance
The reason why I took some time to mention this is because
It is relevant to us on a day to day basis
And we use this calendar
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us strength
When the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam got to Quba
As we made mention
He had stayed in the house of al-Kulthum ibn al-Hidm
According to one narration that was the pronunciation of the name
And this man was one of the leaders of Banu Amr ibn Awf in Quba
A few days later Ali ibn Abi Talib radiallahu anhu arrived in Quba
And this is where he met Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Remember he was left behind in order to give whatever
Amana and trust was entrusted to Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam
By the Mushriks of Makkah
And this is why he stayed back and he gave all those belongings
To the people whom they belonged to
And then he proceeded to al-Madinah al-Munawwara
And he arrived in Quba where he met Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Two or three nights after the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam had arrived
And the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam loved the Ansar
The Ansar are the helpers, the people of Madinah al-Munawwara
Those who opened their homes
And those who loved those who came to them
Today when we have a visitor in our home
Sometimes depending on who exactly it is
We might feel for a while that you know this person is welcome
We are excited and two three days later it becomes a bit of a burden
Allahu Akbar, it becomes a burden
Sometimes from day one it's a burden already
Especially with the hospitality of today
But there Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Not just him who was welcomed
Every single one of the believers
The common factor was you at la ilaha illallah
Muhammad al-Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam
And so do we, you are welcome into our homes
And do you know what they did? Subhanallah
At some stage they opened their doors
They shared their wealth, they shared their property
They shared absolutely everything
And they became known as brothers
Obviously this was a little bit later on
When the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam
A few days after that arrived in Al-Madinah al-Munawwara from Quba
Which was in the outskirts of Madinah at the time
So the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Loved the Ansar so much that in Sahih al-Bukhari
There is a hadith which says that Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Had said
If it wasn't for the Hijra
I would have been a member of the Ansar
Subhanallah, which means these people
They opened their arms to Islam
Unlike the people of Quraish
Who had harmed, who had caused lots of problems and so on
All this was also for a reason known to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
The hikmah of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala is known to him
Sometimes we might pick up a point or two
But in most cases we wouldn't know
What was the reasoning of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
But we surrendered to it, know it or not
So this was one of the narrations mentioned by Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Another point that is worth noting
How many days did the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam spend in Quba?
There are some narrations which make mention of a minimum of four days
Whereas there is a maximum of 19 days
The majority of narrations say approximately two weeks
So approximately two weeks
What happened in Quba was the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Built a masjid
That would have taken a little bit of time
Although it was not as we ended of yesterday
If you remember the question I asked right at the end
About the beautification of the houses of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
At that time the hearts of those who went to the house of Allah were beautified
But the houses of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala were simple
Nowadays the houses of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala are beautified
Are our hearts as beautiful?
That's the question I ended with yesterday
And subhanallah it is a potent question
Because it is the beautification of the heart
That is achieved through the closeness of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
And Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam
That will result in the solution to all our problems and difficulties
And it will drive us closer to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
So let us really spend some time with our own hearts
The condition of my heart
Today the difficulty is everyone is worried about the other man
He is like this, he is like that
In the process we forget about what we are
And what amount of soup we are in
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us and grant us goodness
So Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam built this Masjid
Known as Masjid Quba
And Allah has praised this Masjid in the Quran
And Allah calls it
That Masjid which was built upon piety
The reason for it to be built
Those who helped in it and why it was built was piety
To bring people closer to Allah
To be a place where they could meet
Where they could discuss their issues
Where they could learn
Where they could disseminate the knowledge they had
Where they could prepare for any attack of the enemy
Where they could prepare to retaliate
And at the same time where they could pray their Salah
Where they could meet the messenger
Where they could learn more of the Quran
And the sayings of Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
This was the role of the Masjid
And this is why Masjid Quba was built
And it became a base automatically
And thereafter the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Sent a message to Madina Munawwara to the Ansar
That I now intend to come to Al Madina
And then they sent delegations to pick him up basically
From amongst them some of their leaders
And some of their people
And a lot of them came with some weapons
Because they were worried
They had encircled Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
They did not want the enemy from Quraysh
Or the enemy from amongst the tribes
Who may be jealous around
To harm Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
So for that reason they had come in and encircled him
And they took him subhanallah
And this was a Friday
On a Friday it is reported
Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wa sallam departed
And he started going from Quba to Madina Munawwara
And on the way as some of the narrations make mention
It was the time of Jumu'ah
Now As'ad ibn Zurara radiallahu anhu
He before Jumu'ah was made compulsory
Already used to gather the Muslims on a Friday
He already used to gather the Muslims on a Friday
And they used to talk
They used to engage in Ibadah and so on
Read their Salah
And thereafter when Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Was proceeding from Quba
Going to Madina Munawwara
The time of that Salah of Jumu'ah
Came into place
And he stopped at a place known as Banu Salim ibn Awf
And today if you look at just outside Masjid Quba
There is a little Masjid known as Masjid al-Jumu'ah
Some narrations say that that is where the Jumu'ah took place
One of the khutbas of Muhammad salallahu alaihi wa sallam
Some narrations say that was his first khutba
The first lecture ever delivered to the Ansar and the muhajireen
Was at that particular point
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala knows best
But the wording of it is very interesting
He says oh people
He warns them about Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
And about the meeting with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
The importance to take the leader
Where he says you were like a flock without a shepherd
And Allah gave you the shepherd
And he is going to question you
What did you do?
Did you follow or did you lead yourself astray?
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala make us followers
And then he says fear, the punishment of hell
Even if it means by a small piece of a date
Giving a charity by a piece of a date
Not even a full date, a piece of a date
And if you cannot give that amount of a charity
Then at least by a good word
Mention good words
And this shows us that your sadaqah
And the charities that you give and I give
They have a role to play in saving myself and yourselves from hell fire
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
Many people take it for granted
The one rand or one dollar, one riyal that we give
In the path of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
That perhaps could be a means of our saviour
From the fire of Jahannam
So do not belittle even a single donation
In the right cause towards the poor and the needy
And the cause of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us sustenance
And may he make us content
May he make us people who are happy at all times
So this was a khutba and the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Then proceeded and progressed to al-madinatul munawwara
And there subhanallah
Just try and picture the excitement
The people were so happy
Their messenger was coming
They had accepted Islam already
The bulk of them had accepted Islam already
They had heard so much about this man
First time meeting him
Imagine you hear so much about someone
And they've really taught you so much
And now you're going to see them for the first time
Subhanallah
The excitement
This was a nabi of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
The highest of creation
And he is moving subhanallah
The creatures of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Are at peace with him
Starting from the clouds to the trees
To the stones to the animals
Everything at peace with him
And he is moving with this delegation of people
And at that particular time subhanallah
People used to climb on their roofs
In order to look at what was going on
So you find the women climbing up on their roofs
And the men had rushed out
The children had rushed out
And there is a narration in sahih muslim
Which makes mention of the young boys
And the youngsters of madina munawwara
Chanting a few words
The chanting of the words
Ya muhammad ya rasoolallah
Ya rasoolallah ya muhammad
These words and many other words
Are made mention of in the books of hadith
And as for the books of history
And I explained yesterday the difference
Between the books of history and the books of hadith
The books of history make mention of a song
That we would all have heard
Being sung by some of the young boys and girls
Of madina munawwara
As
And so on
The beautiful words
These are made mention of not in the books of hadith
But in the books of seerah
In the books of history
We ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala to bless us
Indeed it was the donning of a new time in the history
Not only of madina munawwara
But of the muslims at large
Subhanallah
And they were so happy
Everyone wanting to get a glimpse
It is reported subhanallah
That even from amongst the jewish tribes
There were three jewish tribes
Banu Qaynuqa'
Banu An-Nadir
And Banu Qurayza
They were around madina munawwara
They had come from the roman empire
And from the Byzantine empire
They had come down south
And they were also informed
That a messenger would come in an area
Described exactly as madina munawwara
And this is why they camped around there
They stayed there
They came and they heard his words
Some of them tested him by asking him questions
And many of their leaders accepted Islam
Many of the people
When they heard from amongst the jewish people
Many of them
When they heard they accepted Islam
But obviously the bulk of the
Ammah
The bulk of the public of the jews
They were waiting
They were very very skeptical
They did not want to give him to an arab
And they said
These are the children of Ismail
We are the children of his haq
Again it went back to the ignorance
And arrogance of the people of Quraish
They did not want to accept
Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Because Abu Jahl says
That you see the family of this Abu Talib
They have had virtue of this and that
And that and the Zamzam
And now prophethood
We are not going to take it
We don't want it
We cannot give leadership to his child
Or his family
Subhanallah
And this is what made them deny
And this is the exact point
That made the jewish people deny
Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Yet they were waiting for him
And they had settled in Medina Munawwara
Because of that
Subhanallah
And as I told you
Some of their leaders
In fact a lot of their leaders
Had accepted Islam
And from amongst them was
Abdullah ibn Salam radiallahu anhu
We made mention of his story
And I think we should repeat it
He was from amongst those
He says when I saw the messenger
As he came into Medina Munawwara
I was busy with doing something
In my little garden
I left everything and I ran
I saw his face
Obviously he got a glimpse of it
And he says as soon as I saw him
I knew this is not the face of a liar
Subhanallah
And he says
Then I heard some of his words
And from amongst the first words
That were uttered by Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Which were heard by Abdullah ibn Salam
Something
Subhanallah
O people
Spread peace
And feed the food
And reach the merciful
And pray the night
And the people sleep
You will enter the Paradise of your Lord with peace
If you notice the rhyming of it
Obviously this is one of the
Narrations of the Hadith
There are other wordings
But quite similar in meaning
O people
Spread the peace and the peace
Live peacefully
The peace has a very deep meaning
It doesn't just mean
Peace be upon you
As in just a greeting
Empty of any thought
But it actually means
Peace be upon you
From any harm from me
I won't harm you
So peace be upon you
So when we say
Assalamu alaykum
We mean
I'm not going to harm you
Peace be upon you
Not only from me
But from all the creatures
Of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
May you be at total peace
Imagine a dua
We are praying
Whenever we meet one another
For one another
What greater greeting can there be
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Make us from amongst those
Who don't just shorten
Such a powerful prayer
And who can actually say it properly
When we utter it
And may Allah accept it from us
So spread this salam
And feed the people
Feed not only the poor
But feed others
And you will find
That the hearts come closer
You know when you feed people
Subhanallah
A lot of the times
What happens
It is a social event
That brings people together
It makes you discuss things
It brings you closer
And so on
We ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
To grant us hospitality
To make us hospitable people
And to make us appreciative
Of those who are hospitable
Towards us
Alhamdulillah
So he says
At'imu al-ta'am
Feed even the poor
Obviously
How many of us
Would be ready to invite
A wealthy man
Or a popular man
To our homes
What about the poor person
Who is on your street
Have you ever thought
Of giving him food
Subhanallah
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Open our doors
Wasilul arhaama
And fulfill your relations
Fulfill the link
And the tie
And the rights
Of your family members
And pray at night
When everyone is asleep
Because that is the most sincere
When we pray
In everybody's midst
Yes there is sincerity
But perhaps
We are worried about
This man watching
That man watching
So the sincerity levels
Might not be that high
But when you are praying
At night
When nobody is watching you
It's between you and Allah
Subhanahu wa ta'ala
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Open our doors
May he grant us sincerity
In our deeds
Then the hadith
Ended by saying
If you do that
You will enter
The paradise of your Rabb
With great ease
You will enter
Paradise with great ease
Abdullah ibn Salam
Says he came
And he declared
His acceptance
Of the Shahadah
He declared that
This man is indeed
A messenger
Sallallahu alayhi wasallam
And you know the story
I made mention of
Where the Prophet
Sallallahu alayhi wasallam
When he found
That this man was
One of the leaders
Of the Jewish tribes
He told him
That this man
Was one of the leaders
Of the Jewish tribes
He told him
What about your people
He said my people
Will not accept
They said no
Let us call them
So the Rasulullah
Sallallahu alayhi wasallam
Told him to go
Behind the wall
Called the people
And asked him
Who is this man
In your midst
They said
He is a leader
A son of a leader
An honest man
Son of an honest man
Righteous person
Son of a righteous
He is this and that
And they praised him
So then they were told
What if he has accepted Islam
And they said
It is impossible
He won't do that
So then when
The Rasulullah
Sallallahu alayhi wasallam
Called him from
Behind the wall
And asked him
Or in fact
He came out
And declared his Shahada
That I bear witness
That Allah is one
And you are indeed
The final messenger
Of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
They changed their tune instantly
And they said
He is a liar
Son of a liar
He was a traitor
Son of a traitor
He is a cheat
Son of a cheat
And so on
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Not make us from those
Whom when clear cut signs
Come in front of us
We still don't surrender
Allahu Akbar
May Allah open our doors
So this was the beauty
As Nabi Sallallahu alayhi wasallam
Arrived in Al Madinatul Munawwara
And subhanallah
A beautiful day
But everyone wanted
Muhammad Sallallahu alayhi wasallam
To come to his place
Obviously
How did the rest of the
Muhajireen
Enter the homes of the Ansar
How did the rest of the people
Who made Hijra
Enter the homes of the people
Of Madinah Munawwara
Very simple
By what is known as qur'a
Picking lots
Which means
They would pick the name
Of the person
And that particular name
Would go to the next Ansari
Who is waiting in line
So they pick the name
Nobody favored anyone
And nobody chose
I will go with him
He will come with me
No, it was picked out
And subhanallah
More like lots were drawn
For that
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Grant us exception
Meaning
May He accept us
Today if we want to solve
A problem
It is also a Sunnah way
To actually put all your names
In the hat
And pick out one
There's no harm in that
Because it would resolve
Your matter
And it means
Nobody took anyone's chance
Meaning anyone's side
I'm just thinking of something
And that made me
Make a slip of the tongue
That sometimes if people
Want to cheat
They write their name
20 times
So everybody thinks
That there's 20 names
And they're not realizing
There's only one name
20 times
When you pick it out
Anyone picks it out
And the name comes
That's the type of cheating
People in our time
Would engage in
But at that time
Subhanallah
It was just
Now with Muhammad
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Where would he go?
So the narrations
There are two narrations
One makes mention of
The fact that
He had stopped
Where his camel had stopped
And he asked
Whose home is the closest
And Abu Ayub Al-Ansari
Radhiallahu anhu
Says
Here's my home
And here's its door
So he said
This is where I will stop
The other narration
Which is very close
He was off his camel
And as they said
Ya Rasulallah
Come to my home
And so on
He said
Let my camel go
It has been instructed
And it will stop
Wherever I should be
So the camel
Went a little bit
And paused
And sat down
At a specific place
And the closest door
Was the door
Of Abu Ayub Al-Ansari
Radhiallahu anhu
So this is how
The decision was made
And the Prophet
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Wasallahu alaihi wasallam
The Prophet
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Then went into the house
Of Abu Ayub Al-Ansari
He had a house
Which had two floors
Meaning
It was a double story home
And at that time
The second floor
There was no concrete
Between the two floors
So Rasulallah
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Had entered the base
Meaning the bottom floor
And Abu Ayub Al-Ansari
Came with his family
And he says
Oh messenger
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
I cannot allow you
To be here
On this ground floor
When I am going to be above you
I am going to be above you
I can't allow that to happen
You need to go above us
Because as it is
You are higher
It is a sign of respect
We would like to be below
You be above
Rasulallah Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Told him no
I would prefer to be below
Because people would come to meet me
And it would be better
For the family members
Instead of people coming past
The women and everyone
As they come up to see me
Rather I be at the bottom
And you can be at the top
Without any interference
And it is reported
That they were so well behaved
Meaning the children and the family
They were all so well behaved
That they did not want to walk
In a way that would disturb
Rasulallah Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Not only that
It is reported that
One of the urns
That were holding water
Happened to fall and break
There on the top floor
And immediately they got up
And they tried to wipe it out so fast
Because they didn't want the water
To trickle down
And to harm Rasulallah Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
So this narration is also
Made mention of in the books of hadith
As well as in the books of history and seerah
We ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
To make us from amongst those
Who can respect the level
Of Rasulallah Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
And at the same time
Respect the level of the ulama
Because
The ulama are those who have
Inherited from the anbiya
They will have knowledge
Sound knowledge
They will teach
And they will relay
The message of the messengers
And the treatment that people
Give the scholars of Islam
Will be similar to the treatment
That people gave the messengers
Because the message is one
And this is why you find
Societies break up
Into exactly the same groups of people
You have hypocrites
You have people
Who will support the ulama
Who will go down in history
As those who crumbled communities
Because they fought the ulama
And so on
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Let us die in a condition
That we are on the right side
Remember
Not every time should things happen
The way you want them to happen
They should always happen the way
Allah and His Rasul want them to happen
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Grant us goodness
Allahu Akbar
So this was the house of Rasulallah Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
This was the house of Abu Ayyub al-Ansari
Radiyallahu anhu
Beautiful place
Where the Prophet Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Stayed
And in no time
Something else happened
There was need for a place
For the Muslims to gather
Because up to that stage
For a day or two
They had gathered for Salah
Wherever they were
They had read Salah
When the Salah time had come in
They read it wherever they were
Then the Prophet Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Chose a place
Where the Masjid would be built
And again there is a narration
Of his camel being released
And sitting at a specific place
There is also a narration
In the books of history
So here we have
A situation where
A piece of land is located
And now they are looking
For the owners of this land
Who happen to be
Two young orphans
From Banin Najjah
Two orphans
Little boys
Meaning young men
And these boys
They had said
Look, we can give this
Just for free
Meaning we can give it as a gift
This land
Although they didn't have anything
But Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wasallam said
No, we will pay for it
And he paid for it
And he gave them their price
And thereafter
The place was cleared
Because there were trees there
It was like an orchard
And they had cleared the trees
And so on
And they had put a little bit of a
Demarcation
To demarcate
That this is going to be
The Masjid of Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Al-Masjidun Nabawi
The original structure
Was very small
Very simple
Subhanallah
And it did not take them too long
To get it ready
For your information
No carpet
No marble
No tiles
No concrete
All they did was cleared it
And that's it
So when they made Sajda
They had marks on their knees
Marks on their toes
Marks on their hands
And marks on their foreheads
Subhanallah
And what type of a roof did they have?
They had a roof made up of
The stumps of the palm tree
And a little bit of the
The branches of the palm tree
That were all put together
And crossed together
And they had had that
And that would be the roof
At that particular time
This is how it was
How high was it?
It was not very high
Such that a young boy
If he had to put his hand up
He would be able to touch the roof
He would be able to touch
What we would term the ceiling
So it was not very high
And right next to it
With it
The Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
Had instructed the building of two rooms
For his wives
Now Sawda bint Zam'a radiallahu anha
She was the wife of Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
And he had married Aisha
Radiallahu anha
Before Hijra
And now after Hijra
After some time
When they finally lived together
That was her home
Hujrat Aisha al-Siddiqa radiallahu anha
And that is the home where
Ultimately Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
Passed away
And that is where he is buried today
May Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
Grant us a lesson
So these houses were built very low
If you had a youngster stand up
He could actually feel the top
This is how the books have made mention of it
And Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
When they were building this masjid
They had a habit
They were so excited
Because they had peace
For the first time
They had peace
Imagine the gift of peace and security
Is one of the biggest gifts you can have
And you don't realize it
Until you don't have it
Or you only realize it
If you have not had it in the past
And now you have it
So the Muslims were so happy
They were chanting
As they were working
Taking the bricks and making them
And any Sahabi who knew anything about building
There were some who had come from afar
Who were experts in mixing the sand
And so on and making the clay
They were called in
And they were helping
Subhanallah
He made use of all the experts of building
And at that particular time
They were also chanting
They had this habit of chanting
A few little poems as they worked
Up to today sometimes you notice
People who work very hard
They chant something
They say a few words
Just to make it light
Let's hope that these words are good
That time they were always good
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness
So these words made mention of
In Sahih al-Bukhari
Allahumma la aisha illa aisha al-akhirah
Fansulil ansara wal muhajirah
O Allah there is no life
Besides the life of the akhirah
Ya Allah this life is nothing
The life of the akhirah is what is important
And the dua is
So O Allah help the ansar
And help the muhajireen
Help those who are from Madinah
Who are the helpers
And help those who have migrated
All the way from Mecca
And come to Al-Madinah al-Munawwara
This is just one of the statements
That they were uttering
Now, once they were building this masjid
Before the masjid was completed
There was the death
Of one of the sahabah r.a
Who was he?
His name was As'ad ibn Zurara r.a
He passed away
Before the completion of the building
Of al-masjid al-nabawi
He had met Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wasallam in Madinah
Remember?
He was from amongst those first ones
Who had pledged with Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wasallam
Once, twice, thrice
And then they came to Al-Madinah al-Munawwara
And he passed away
Look at what Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Had created him for
To support the cause
Subhanallah
So he had passed away
Another person who passed away as well
Was Damurah ibn Jundub
He was a person who was from Makkah al-Mukarrama
He had fallen very ill
Before he could make the Hijra
So he told his relatives
Look, take me out
I want to make Hijra
Because the prophet has instructed us
To make Hijra
Although I am very sick
And he passed away
In Tan'im on the outskirts of Makkah al-Mukarrama
And verses were revealed
In order to show the status of those
Who passed away whilst on the journey
So Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala revealed verses
Arabic
Whosoever has come out of their homes
Intending the Hijra
And then they pass away
Their reward is written with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
They will get a full reward of it
Subhanallah
He was also one of those who passed away
Another member who was a senior member
Of the Ansar who had passed away
One of the twelve whom
Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam had chosen
To look after the people of Medina
Between the pledge and the Hijra
His name was Al-Baraa ibn Ma'rur
And this radiallahu anhu
He passed away in the month of Safar
Just before Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Had entered Quba
This man had passed away
So he did not see Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Post Hijra
But he had already met him before the Hijra
He was a sahabi
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness
Also who passed away
The man whom the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Stayed at his house in Quba
Al-Kulthum ibn Al-Hidm
Or Kulthum ibn Al-Hidm
Al-Hidm
This man radiallahu anhu
He passed away as well
Very very soon after that
When the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Had come into Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah
Now there is a very interesting dua
That the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Made in Madinah
Madinah the weather is different from Makkah
Totally different
The cold is severe
The heat is also severe
And the cold has in it
Or it used to have in it
A sickness and a disease
Known as Humma
The Humma of Madinah
This Humma of Yathrib in fact
It was very common
And it used to kill a lot of people every year
So the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Was told about it
These are the tough conditions of
Madinah Munawwarah
Do you know what the hadith says to us?
Man sabara ala harriha wa bardiha
Dakhala al-jannah
Whoever can bear patience
Upon the heat and the cold of Madinah
Allah will grant them jannah
So don't complain of the weather
You go there, it was very hot
Hang on, just say Alhamdulillah
We are in the blessed place
That is what's important
Whether it's hot or cold
Is besides the point
Subhanallah
You know I sit and I think of people
May Allah protect us
For sports, what would they do?
They would buy their tickets well in advance
They would go for the whole season
And they would go to Europe
Even in the hottest
Even if their fasts happened to have been the longest
But they will still go
And to them, they went for a purpose
To kick a ball or to watch people kicking a ball
To throw a little piece
And to watch people throwing a discus and so on
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala safeguard us
We have the deen
When we go to the holy lands
Never ever complain about the weather
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala take us there
Again and again
Who knows perhaps in the heat of the moment
Or the cold of Madinah
That might be the moment of acceptance of your dua
And you might be a person who is granted jannah
Because of that dua
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant that to us
So he made a dua
He says
O Allah, make us love Madinah
As much as we love Makkah
Makkah is your birth place
We all know the birth place
You always go back there
Some people marry and they travel
But their hearts are still stuck somewhere
Where they were born
And when they go back there
Everything seems to be greeting them
You see why?
Because you look at this familiar
You look at that familiar, mashaAllah
See all the smiles
I see there are some jama'is that we have here as well
MashaAllah
Some sons-in-law
Perhaps that we have here
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala open our doors
Believe me
It's a happy moment
To go and see your home once again
So the hearts were connected
To the birth place of Rasulullah
Which was Makkah
So now he's making a dua
O Allah, grant us the love of Madinah
As we love Makkah
And even more
Subhanallah
And that love has become even more
In terms of spirituality
The salah and the place
Which is most sacred
Is the Haram in Makkah
Without a doubt
Immediately after that
The Haram in Madinah
Without a doubt
Immediately after that
The Haram in Jerusalem
Without a doubt
That brings me to a point
When the Masjid was built
Which way was the Qibla?
Interesting question
It was facing Jerusalem
We as Muslimin initially
Were instructed to face Jerusalem
In order to create uniformity
When we pray
That was it
The reason why we face a specific direction
Is for uniformity
We don't worship any stones
Or any people and so on
But it is to create uniformity
No rich man must come and say
Hang on, face it towards my house
Or the other one says
You know what?
I'm going to put something here
You must face it in this direction
Or I don't like this building
This way, put it this way
No, no one has a say
It's the house of Allah
He decides which way it faces
So he decided at that time
It must face Jerusalem
That was the house of Allah
Subhanahu wa ta'ala
That was built by Ibrahim A.S. as well
In Jerusalem
You find Masjid Al-Aqsa
So we used to face in that direction
Now, the Prophet S.A.W
Made this dua
The continuation of the dua
He says
O Allah, make it pure for us to live in
This Medina Munawwara
Purified, Ya Allah
Subhanahu wa ta'ala
From what?
This disease that is in it
The Prophet S.A.W
The Prophet S.A.W says
O Allah, take this disease
That comes in it every year
And place it outside Medina Munawwara
In a place known as Juhfa
And it's reported that from that time
This sickness was gone
It disappeared
People did not get sick
With that humma of Yathrib thereafter
They didn't
This was a miracle of nubuwa
The miracle of Rasulullah S.A.W
He made a dua
And this disease
This sickness
This influenza or flu
Whatever it was
Which used to take the lives of so many people
Every year
It stopped
And it was gone out
And it went into a specific place
Known as Juhfa
According to the narrations
In Sahih al-Bukhari
And then he made another dua
O Allah, grant us baraka
In the sustenance that is achieved here
In Medina Munawwara
The wording of the dua is
Grant us baraka in the measurement
And in the handfuls that we give and take
Sa' is a measurement
It is actually a measurement
Where they used to measure
When they used to give and take
Some of the flour and the wheat and so on
And the mud
When they used to give some other items
They used to measure it with their hands
So ya Allah, put baraka in it
Wallahi, my beloved brothers and sisters
I need to tell you something
That you can bear witness regarding
Do you see the dates?
You can have dates from anywhere in the world
But pick up a date from Medina Munawwara
It has a different taste in it
Do you bear witness?
Subhanallah
You can pick up a date from anywhere in the world
You can tell this is a Kalahari date
This is another date from elsewhere
This is an Algerian date
You can tell it
And believe me
The date of Medina Munawwara
It has a totally different taste to it
And a sweetness in it
Perhaps it is this dua of Muhammad
Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
That has granted it such baraka
Because this was included in the dua
Mentioned in Sahih al-Bukhari
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness
The Hijra was an instruction
Of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
So everyone was instructed
To fulfill the Hijra
Whoever didn't, they were sinful
The only people who were not sinful
Were those who were unable
Either because they were blocked
They were stopped or they didn't have the means
And so on
But if people were able to fulfill the Hijra
And they did not
They were sinful
So the Hijra was farad
It was compulsory upon all
The bulk of the people had actually made Hijra
In fact at some stage
When Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
Had settled down in Al-Madeenatul Munawwara
He sent Subhanallah
Zayd ibn Haritha and Abu Rafi'a to Mecca
To collect the rest of his
And Abu Bakr As-Siddiq radiallahu anhu's families
So who came all together?
Fatima, the daughter of Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
And his other daughter Um Kulthum
And Sawda, the wife of Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
Ibn Tizan'a radiallahu anha
Ummu Ayman, the second mother
Of Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
We made mention of her
At the beginning of these episodes
When we spoke about the woman
Who looked after Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
By this time she was married to Zayd ibn Haritha
Zayd ibn Haritha was the one who went to go and collect them
And I think I made mention of this incident
That the Prophet Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam said
Whoever wants to marry a woman from paradise
Should marry Ummu Ayman
And Zayd ibn Haritha married her
He was as fair as anything in complexion
And she was dark in complexion being from Africa
And he did not even doubt
The minute Muhammad Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam said
Whoever wants to marry a woman from paradise
Should marry Ummu Ayman, he married her
And they had a blessed child Usamah ibn Zayd
Who was born just before the Hijrah
And he had also been brought into Madinah Munawarah
Together with his mother Ummu Ayman
And the Usamah ibn Zayd
As for Zaynab, the daughter of Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
She was married to a man known as Abu al-Aas ibn al-Rabi'
He did not accept Islam
And he stopped his daughter from going through the Hijrah
So she was from amongst those who was excused at that particular time
Together with them, the family of Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq radiallahu anhu
Ummu Oman radiallahu anhu
The wife of Abu Bakr, As-Siddiq radiallahu anhu
Aisha radiallahu anhu
The wife of Rasulullah Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
Asma'ah binti Abi Bakr
Who was the wife of Az-Zubair ibn al-Awwam radiallahu anhu
And this Asma'ah, she was pregnant
And when she came into Madinah Munawarah
She delivered a child whose name was Abdullah ibn al-Zubair
The son of Az-Zubair ibn al-Awwam radiallahu anhu
This man, remember this name
Abdullah ibn al-Zubair
The grandchild of Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq radiallahu anhu
And the son of Az-Zubair ibn al-Awwam
The son of Asma'ah binti Abi Bakr
He was the first to be born from amongst the Muhajireen
After the Hijrah, amazing
So this was the first child of the Muhajireen
Born in Madinah Munawarah
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us blessing
Wallahi, it is the city of Rasul
Sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
And indeed it is a very very blessed city
We can feel it from the outskirts as we are drawing near
The calmness, the serenity
This is just the gift of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
So these were the people who had come through
And Abdullah, the son of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq radiallahu anhu
Had also come through
What had happened is the masjid was now built
The people were settling in
There were a few conditions around in Madinah Munawarah
Perhaps we will divulge
Meaning we will expand on it tomorrow
By the will of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
But today we want to make mention of the history of Adhan
Because Adhan is the call which is called to the prayer
They used to get together for the time of prayer
And they sat to discuss with Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
What should we do?
To remind the people it's prayer time
So some people suggested
Let us raise a flag when it's prayer time
And then they said no we don't want to do that
For whatever reason
And perhaps this flag it's not one of our ways of doing things
Then some of them suggested
Okay let's light a fire
So the smoke will go around
And we will be able to
Let the people know that this is now the time of Salah
They disagreed with that as well
We don't light fires
Then they said
Okay let us blow in a bugle
They said no we won't blow a bugle
Because that is the way of the non-believers
Then they said
Okay why don't we hit on a bell
Or we ring a bell?
Subhanallah
Then they said no
That is the Christian way of calling towards prayer
So we won't do that
And one of them had suggested that
Why don't we call the people?
We just called them
So Abdullah ibn Zayd al-Ansari
Was one of those who used to call the people for Salah
But with no specific wording
He just used to go out at the time of Salah
And remind the people
Come for Salah, come for Salah and so on
Salah, Salah
And they would call the people through
And later on this was known as Tathweeb
Tathweeb was after the Adhan when we go out
And we tell people
Come, come let's go for Salah, Salah
That is a Sunnah of Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
However this man Abdullah ibn Zayd al-Ansari
Radhiallahu anhu
He saw a dream
Just within a few days
And in the dream
A man came to him and told him
Why don't you utter these words?
And taught him the Adhan
Exactly as we know it today
Allah is the greatest
I bear witness that there is none worthy of worship
But Allah
I bear witness that Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
Is his messenger
His worshipper
Come for Salah
Come for success
Allah is definitely the greatest
There is none worthy of worship besides Allah
These are the words
Of the call to prayer
So when he got up
He went to the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
And he told him the dream
And the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam tells him
Inna ha la ru'ya haqq
Indeed it is a true dream
I've already been given revelation
With these exact words
Now comes the important part
Very important point
We need to learn
The Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam looks at him and says
Lakin dhalika bilal
Fa inna hu anna sawtam mink
Go and teach these words to Bilal
Because he has a much more beautiful and louder voice than yours
Amazing
What do we learn from this?
We learn that the Muadhin
Means to be a person who has a beautiful voice
Who calls the Adhan in a way
That automatically attracts people towards the Salah
May Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam grant that to us
And may he make us from those
Whom when we call the Adhan
Everybody comes
Amazing
You see when you have an Adhan
And it's powerful
And it's called
Well, people listen to it
The non-believers listen to a beautiful Adhan
They wait for the next one
I have had people who know me
Who told me
That you know this particular Masjid
We actually wait and listen to this call
It's so sweet
We don't even know what it means
But we get so much sweetness
Out of listening to the beauty of it
And we know the tune
Because obviously
You know the Muadhins are known for their tunes
They stick normally to one particular tune
Each person
And that would actually sound
Not only in this world
But even in the Akhirah
Subhanallah
The Hadith says
Those who will have the tallest
Or the longest necks
They will be the most conspicuous
On the day of judgment
Will be Al Muadhinoon
Those who used to call out Adhan
They will be known from a distance
Why? Conspicuous, very high
Why will they be so high?
The Hadith says
If the people had known the value
Of calling out the Adhan
And the value of standing in the first Saf
Then if they couldn't do it
They would actually draw lots
In order to pick up
Who is the one who's going to be there?
That's how serious it is
And that's how well virtue
Or that's how highly virtuous it is
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Grant it to us
Did you know the value of calling out the Adhan?
Subhanallah
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Grant it to us
Did you know that the Muadhin
Gets the full reward of everyone
Who came to the Masjid
All their Salahs
So if we are 700 people here
For example
The Muadhin gets 701 Salahs
Rewards for that one Salah
Why?
He called them to the prayer
Subhanallah
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Open our doors
And sometimes we find ourselves
Treading all over these people
And we don't even realize their value
Subhanahu wa ta'ala
Grant us paradise
And may He grant them paradise too
So Bilal ibn Rabah radiallahu anhu
Was told
And subhanallah
He started calling the prayer
Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar
Subhanallah
Beautiful call to prayer
And we know it to this day
Bilal ibn Rabah was the one
Who started uttering these words
The Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
Had two main Muadhins
One was Bilal
And the other one
Do you remember we made mention of him?
Abdullah ibn Umm Maktum
The blind man
Subhanallah
Radiallahu anhu
Jami'an
May Allah be pleased with them
All of them
It's important for us
To know these names
We are going to meet these people
It's important for us
To know these names
And to be able to recognize
These people
By the will of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
So Bilal ibn Rabah
In the Fajr prayer
He added something
What did he add?
As-salaatu khayrun minannaun
Subhanallah
Salah is better than sleep
Prayer is better than sleep
He added that
So the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
Aqarrahu ala dhaalik
He said
Yes, that is correct
You can say
So up to today
For the Fajr prayer
We add that
Subhanallah
Now it's important for us to know
That the Jumu'ah prayer
Had one Adhan
Later on at the time of
Uthman ibn Affan
Radiallahu anhu
He introduced another second Adhan
Which was also from above
They used to call it
From the top
A high place
At that time
There were no minarets
As we have them today
No where the loud hail
Is as we have them today
But they used to call it
From the top
Above
And they used to call it
In a way that
Everyone could hear
So Uthman ibn Affan
Radiallahu anhu
Decided that
Look, we want to
Call the people
So let us call them
Through for Jumu'ah
Another Adhan
So he introduced
A second Adhan
Outside
And Hisham ibn Abdul Malik
Who was on
In the Amawi Empire
He is the one who told
That Muadhin come inside
And stand in front of
The Imam
So the Adhan that we have
In front of the Imam
That happens on a Friday
Is actually
The original Adhan
For Jumu'ah
But it was brought
Into the Masjid by
Hisham ibn Abdul Malik
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Grant us goodness
And may He make us
From those who know
The history of the Adhan
Also in Ramadan
Many generations
Make mention of the Prophet
Sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
Having had two Adhans
For Fajr
One would wake up
The lazy for Suhoor
And the other one
Would actually
Get the people in for
For Salatul Fajr
And this is why
To this day
You find in a lot of
The Middle Eastern countries
In Ramadan
They have an early Adhan
Which is actually
Getting you up
For Tahajjud
And at the same time
Telling you it is now
Time for Suhoor
And then you have
Another Adhan
That is for Salatul Fajr
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Open our doors
Insha'Allah tomorrow
We will go through
More of what happened
In the initial stages
In Al-Madinah Al-Munawwara
Before we go into
The difficulties
That were faced
Once again
At the hands of Quraish
And the enemies of Islam
Until then we say
Wa sallallahu wa sallam
Wa baraka ala Nabina Muhammad
Subhanallahi wa bihamdih
Subhanaka Allahumma
Wa bihamdih
Ash hadu alla ilaha illa anta
Nastaghfiruka
Wa natubu ilaik